---
chunk_index: 7
total_chunks: 38
previous_chunk: "chunk_06.txt"
next_chunk: "chunk_08.txt"
content_length: 52681
---

### USER (Session 621629b6)
please read this and extract anything useful

arXiv:2506.11019v1 [cs.SE] 14 May 2025
Mind the Metrics: Patterns for Telemetry-Aware In-IDE
AI Application Development using Model Context Protocol
(MCP)
Vincent Koc iD vincentk@comet.com
Jacques Verre jacques@comet.com
Douglas Blank iD doug@comet.com
Abigail Morgan abigailm@comet.com
Comet ML, Inc.
Abstract
Modern AI-driven development environments are destined to evolve into observability-first
platforms by integrating real-time telemetry and feedback loops directly into the developer
workflow. This paper introduces telemetry-aware IDEs driven by Model Context Protocol (MCP), a new paradigm for building software. We articulate how an IDE (integrated
development environment), enhanced with an MCP client/server, can unify prompt engineering with live metrics, traces, and evaluations to enable iterative optimization and robust
monitoring. We present a progression of design patterns: from local large language model
(LLM) coding with immediate metrics feedback, to continuous integration (CI) pipelines
that automatically refine prompts, to autonomous agents that monitor and adapt prompts
based on telemetry. Instead of focusing on any single optimizer, we emphasize a general
architecture (exemplified by the Model Context Protocol and illustrated through Comet’s
Opik MCP server implementation) that consolidates prompt and agent telemetry for the
future integration of various optimization techniques. We survey related work in prompt
engineering, AI observability, and optimization (e.g., Prompts-as-Programs, DSPy’s MIPRO,
Microsoft’s PromptWizard) to position this approach within the emerging AI developer
experience. This theoretical systems perspective highlights new design affordances and
workflows for AI-first software development, laying a foundation for future benchmarking
and empirical studies on optimization in these environments.
1 Introduction
The rise of large language models and AI “copilot” systems has transformed software development, introducing
AI agents into Integrated Development Environments (IDEs) to assist with coding, content generation, and
decision-making (Hou et al., 2025). However, developing AI-driven applications poses new challenges: LLMbased components are non-deterministic, difficult to debug, and often behave in a non-transparent (black-box)
manner. Traditional software engineering practices rely on **observability** (the ability to infer internal
states of a system from its external outputs like logs, metrics, and traces) to understand and debug systems,
and a specialized discipline, LLMOps (Large Language Model Operations), is emerging to address the unique
lifecycle management challenges of LLMs (Management Solutions, 2023; Shi et al., 2024). We propose that
AI-first IDEs should similarly be telemetry-aware, treating prompts and AI agent interactions with the
same rigor as code, by integrating real-time **telemetry** (the collection and transmission of data such
as evaluation metrics, trace logs, and performance signals from remote or internal system components for
monitoring) into the development loop, a concept we term “Agent-Integrated Development Environment
(AIDE)”.
1
Developer’s AI
Application
Opik
Telemetry & Trace Store
Opik MCP Client
(HTTP / gRPC)
AI-Assisted IDE
(Tool-calling LLM)
trace stream
getMetrics()
metrics / traces query metrics
telemetry context
Figure 1: Baseline telemetry workflow with the Model Context Protocol (MCP). The AI application streams
traces directly into Opik. An MCP client retrieves metrics/traces from Opik on demand. The AI-assisted
IDE uses telemetry signals from the MCP client (via the diagonal dashed arrow), feeding its tool-calling
LLM to refine prompts and code.
AI observability has recently emerged as a critical need for reliable deployment of LLM applications (Sergeyuk
et al., 2024). Observability provides insight into an AI system’s behavior by gathering runtime data (or
telemetry) such as prompts, model responses, cost, and quality metrics. New platforms have been built to log
and analyze LLMs, allowing teams to debug complex prompt chains, measure accuracy and hallucination
rates, and assess how changes impact model outputs (Comet, 2025a). Yet, these capabilities are often external
to the IDE and continuous integration process. We argue for observability-first design: making telemetry and
evaluations a first-class citizen within the IDE, so that developers (and the AI) can iterate on prompts and
agent desgin with faster feedback, analogous to how they iteratively refine code using logs and tests.
This paper introduces telemetry awareness to an IDE to facilitate AI developement. This is inspired by the
recently proposed Model Context Protocol (MCP), a standardized open-interface for connecting AI models
with external tools and resources (Hou et al., 2025; Anthropic, 2024). In our vision, an MCP client/server
acts as a unified broker of metrics (quantitative signals and traces), control (commands or adjustments to AI
agents), and prompt data (prompt templates and versions). By interfacing the IDE with an MCP server,
developers can seamlessly manage prompts, retrieve evaluation metrics, inspect traces of the LLM’s reasoning,
and could even send control instructions to running agents in a consistent and standardized manner. This
transforms the IDE into an interactive AI observability dashboard as well as a coding environment.
To ground this paradigm, we describe a progression of design patterns that illustrate increasing integration of
telemetry in the AI development workflow:
• Local Development with Metrics-in-the-Loop: Developers working in an AI-enhanced IDE receive
real-time feedback from the LLM runs in the form of metrics and traces (including evaluations). The
IDE can display evaluation results (e.g. error rates, token usage, latency, accuracy, hallucination)
after each prompt or application execution and allow querying of trace logs. This immediate feedback
loop helps identify flaws in prompts or agent logic early on.
• CI-Integrated Prompt Optimization: Telemetry-aware design extends to continuous integration.
Prompt quality checks and automated optimizations run as part of CI pipelines, using stored traces
and metrics to refine prompts or catch regressions. The MCP protocol provides a consistent API to
fetch evaluation results and update prompts programmatically during testing and QA phases.
• Autonomous Monitoring Agents: In the most advanced pattern, autonomous monitoring agents leverage the telemetry stream to continuously watch an AI system in runtime and suggest improvements.
These agents, which can be implemented as LLM-based evaluators or scripts, use the MCP interface
to query interactions and metrics, then generate improved prompts or fine-tuning instructions without
direct human intervention.
2
Crucially, we emphasize the architecture that makes these patterns possible. We detail how an open-source
MCP client/server can unify prompt and agent telemetry across development and deployment environments,
enabling future integration of optimizers. Rather than proposing a specific optimization algorithm, our focus
is on the design affordances of this architecture, specifically how it creates a foundation upon which tools like
DSPy’s MIPRO or PromptWizard could plug in to automatically tune prompts using the rich data collected.
By decoupling the collection of metrics, traces and evaluations from the optimization logic, the MCP-based
approach allows any number of optimization strategies (heuristic, learned, or hybrid) to be applied in a
modular way.
This work is a theoretical and architectural insight paper. We do not present benchmark experiments or
claim specific performance improvements. Instead, we identify emerging workflows and frameworks that
point toward a new developer experience for AI applications. We cite related efforts in prompt engineering
and LLM observability to show how the community is converging on this paradigm. Our hope is that this
conceptual framework will inform and inspire more comprehensive evaluations in future work, where the
impact of telemetry-aware development on model performance, developer productivity, and reliability can be
systematically measured. However, we have made early progress on developing a prototype MCP client/server,
applied to test-cases and have started on experimentation with IDE-assisted prompt optimization.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work in AI-assisted IDEs, prompt
optimization, and observability for LLM systems. Section 3 introduces the telemetry-aware design patterns
in detail, illustrating each stage of the development lifecycle. Section 4 presents the MCP architecture and
its implementation in an example system, describing how it unifies metrics, control signals, and prompts.
Section 5 discusses the implications of this paradigm and outlines avenues for future research, including the
integration of advanced optimizers. Finally, Section 6 concludes with a summary of key insights. An appendix
provides supplementary materials and figures.
2 Background and Related Work
2.1 AI Integration in Development Environments
Integrated Development Environments (IDEs) have begun incorporating AI assistance to enhance programmer
productivity and decision-making (Hou et al., 2025). For example, code completion and synthesis tools
powered by LLMs (e.g., GitHub Copilot, Cursor, Zencoder’s agentic solutions (Zencoder.ai, 2024)) have
become common. Recent studies survey the Human-AI experience in IDEs, highlighting the need to design
appropriate user interfaces and interactions for these AI features (Wang et al., 2022). Key challenges include
building trust in AI suggestions, ensuring readability of AI-generated code, and designing task-specific UI
affordances for effective collaboration between the developer and the AI assistant (Anuyah et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2022). These findings underscore that integrating AI into development is not just a matter of model
quality, but also of how information flows to the developer. Our work builds on this premise by channeling rich
telemetry information into the IDE, thus giving developers deeper insight into the AI’s behavior (addressing
trust and transparency) and enabling more informed interventions.
Another trend is the emergence of frameworks where LLMs act as controllers or orchestrators in complex
workflows. HuggingGPT is a prominent example, where an LLM (ChatGPT) manages calls to numerous
task-specific models to solve multi-step AI tasks. In HuggingGPT, the LLM plans a sequence of subtasks,
selects appropriate models from a model hub (HuggingFace), invokes them, and aggregates the results. This
demonstrates an agentic use of LLMs that goes beyond single-turn prompting; the LLM essentially becomes
a runtime decision-maker coordinating a pipeline. Such multi-component “AI programs” are powerful but
difficult to debug or optimize, as errors can arise from prompt mis-specifications, model selection issues, or data
passing between steps. This motivates first-class observability for LLM-driven workflows. By instrumenting
each step (e.g., logging model outputs, timestamps, intermediate prompts), developers can trace the chain of
events and identify bottlenecks or failure points. Our proposed MCP-driven approach aligns with this need,
as it provides a uniform way to capture and query traces from multi-agent or tool-augmented LLM systems.
In fact, the value of capturing trace data for agent-based systems is already being recognized. For instance,
Comet’s Opik platform can record full execution traces of agent frameworks like HuggingGPT or Google’s
3
Agent Development Kit, giving developers “deep visibility into agent behavior and orchestration” (Comet,
2025a).
2.2 Prompt Engineering and Optimization Methods
Prompt engineering has emerged as a critical discipline for aligning LLM behavior with user needs. Early
prompt engineering relied on manual craft and intuition, but as applications scale, there is growing interest
in automated prompt optimization. Two notable research directions are: (1) treating prompts as structured,
modular programs, and (2) using AI feedback loops to refine prompts.
In the first category, prompts are viewed not as monolithic strings but as compositions of reusable components
like instructions, examples, and context inserts. The "Prompts-as-Programs" concept formalizes this view
(Schnabel & Neville, 2024), with Schnabel and Neville (2024) introducing Sammo, a framework for compiletime prompt optimization. In Sammo, a complex prompt (or "metaprompt") is represented as a call graph of
components (e.g., functions to render different sections of the prompt). This structured representation allows
systematic transformations akin to compiler optimizations, for example, pruning irrelevant instructions or
tuning hyperparameters of prompt components (Schnabel & Neville, 2024). Sammo’s approach was influenced
by DSPy (Declarative Self-Improving Python), which also treats prompt engineering as programming. DSPy is
an open-source framework that enables developers to define LLM application logic in a modular way and then
optimize prompts through code-based experimentation. Rather than relying purely on trial-and-error, DSPy
provides teleprompter algorithms (e.g., Cooperative, Bayesian optimizers) that iteratively adjust prompt
instructions and few-shot examples to improve task performance (Khattab et al., 2023). The advantage
of DSPy is that it integrates prompt tracking and tuning into a code workflow: one can programmatically
log model outputs and evaluate them against assertions or examples, then let the optimizer propose better
variants. This aligns closely with telemetry-aware development, where tracking essentially involves collecting
metrics on prompt outcomes, and self-improvement uses these metrics to drive prompt updates.
In the second category, AI feedback loops, we see techniques like Microsoft’s PromptWizard (Agarwal et
al., 2024). PromptWizard is a fully automated framework where the LLM itself is employed to critique and
refine prompts in an iterative loop. The process begins with an initial prompt (and possibly a few training
examples) and proceeds as follows: the LLM generates multiple candidate prompt variants, tests them (by
trying to solve the task or by using an evaluation function), and then analyzes its own outputs to suggest
improvements. This “self-evolving” mechanism means the LLM alternates between being a solver and a critic,
using each round’s feedback to produce a better prompt in the next round. PromptWizard jointly optimizes
the instruction part of the prompt and the choice of few-shot examples, even synthesizing new examples that
expose weaknesses in the prompt. Notably, PromptWizard’s design reflects a general template: provide a
feedback signal, and let the model itself search for prompt improvements. The feedback can be as simple as
task accuracy or a critique rubric, and the search is guided by the model’s ability to introspect on errors. In
essence, this approach also leverages telemetry (feedback metrics) to drive prompt updates, although the
’agent’ acting on telemetry is the LLM itself.
The above approaches (Sammo, DSPy, PromptWizard) are complementary to our proposed paradigm. They
supply algorithms and frameworks for optimizing prompts, while our MCP-based telemetry integration
provides the necessary infrastructure to apply such optimizers continuously and contextually. In particular, an
observability-first IDE could feed actual usage traces and evaluation metrics into a DSPy’s MIPRO optimizer
or PromptWizard loop. Prior work often used static datasets or fixed evaluation sets for optimization; by
contrast, an MCP telemetry pipeline could enable optimizers to work with live data from real user interactions
and test cases as they happen, closing the gap between prompt tuning and deployment behavior.
2.3 Telemetry and Observability for LLM Systems
Observability is a well-established concept in software reliability, referring to the ability to infer internal
states of a system from its external outputs such as logs, metrics, and traces. For LLM-based applications,
telemetry data includes prompt inputs, model outputs, intermediate reasoning steps (if available), timings,
token usage, and user feedback, among other signals. Several recent works and tools underline the importance
of LLM observability. On the conceptual side, Onose et al. (2024) define LLM observability as "the practice
4
of gathering data (telemetry) while an LLM-powered system is running to analyze, assess, and enhance
its performance" (Sergeyuk et al., 2024). This involves recording prompts and responses, tracing requests
through any pipelines or chains, monitoring performance metrics (like latency and error rates), and evaluating
output quality via automated or human feedback. The goal is to provide developers with visibility into the
behavior of otherwise opaque AI components, thereby enabling debugging and iterative improvement.
Alongside the growth of LLM observability, the broader field of LLMOps (Large Language Model Operations)
has rapidly evolved as an adaptation of MLOps principles tailored for the specific needs of LLMs (Management
Solutions, 2023; Sinha et al., 2024). LLMOps encompasses the entire lifecycle of LLMs, from data preparation
and model training through deployment, monitoring, and maintenance in production environments (Management Solutions, 2023; Pahune & Akhtar, 2025). This discipline addresses significant challenges inherent to
large models, such as managing vast datasets, scaling computational resources (often requiring specialized
hardware like GPUs/TPUs and parallelization techniques), and ensuring continuous model performance,
which includes mitigating biases, detecting hallucinations, and countering model degradation over time (Management Solutions, 2023; Shi et al., 2024). Key best practices in LLMOps include robust data management,
continuous model training and fine-tuning, designing scalable infrastructure, rigorous monitoring and observability, security and compliance, inference optimization, CI/CD for seamless updates, collaborative workflows,
human-in-the-loop (HITL) mechanisms for quality control, and adherence to ethical considerations (Pahune
& Akhtar, 2025). LLMOps emphasizes ensuring the stability, reliability, interpretability, and maintainability
of models, often requiring real-time monitoring and proactive strategies to address issues promptly (Shi et
al., 2024). Recent advancements further highlight the importance of HITL systems, adversarial testing for
robustness, and mature CI/CD pipelines to enhance LLM accuracy and ensure scalable, reliable deployments
(Pahune & Akhtar, 2025).
Multiple platforms have arisen to support LLM observability in practice, including Opik by Comet and other
tools built on open standards such as OpenTelemetry. These platforms typically offer SDKs or APIs to
instrument LLM calls in applications, sending trace data to a centralized dashboard. Common features are
storing all prompt inputs and outputs, logging metadata (timestamps, model versions, prompt templates
used), and attaching evaluations (e.g., automatically scoring model responses for correctness or toxicity via
classifier models or LLM judges). For instance, Opik (an open-source LLM evaluation platform) allows teams
to “log, evaluate, and iterate” on LLM prompts and agent flows with a scalable backend (Comet, 2025a). A
distinctive aspect of Opik is its focus on tracing and evaluation as core capabilities: it records the sequence of
calls in an agent or chain, and it can run evaluation routines on each output (such as computing hallucination
scores or comparing against reference answers). The platform must handle high-volume data from every LLM
interaction and support analytical queries over this data. Technologies like OpenTelemetry, a standard for
capturing and exporting trace data, have been extended to work with LLM-specific data, allowing integration
with existing APM (Application Performance Monitoring) tools.
The Model Context Protocol (MCP) has recently been proposed as a standardized way to integrate such
observability and control across AI tools. Hou et al. (2025) introduce MCP as “a standardized interface
designed to enable seamless interaction between AI models and external tools and resources, breaking
down data silos and facilitating interoperability across diverse systems” (Hou et al., 2025). Anthropic also
open-sourced their version of the Model Context Protocol in late 2024, aiming to create a universal standard
for connecting AI systems with diverse data sources, thereby simplifying how AI systems access necessary
data (Anthropic, 2024). Their work outlines the core components and workflow of MCP, including the concept
of MCP servers that manage the context for AI models (prompts, tools, state) through well-defined phases
like creation, operation, and update. They also highlight industry adoption and use cases of MCP, indicating
that companies are beginning to build infrastructure around this protocol for AI orchestration. Our use of
the term MCP aligns with this vision, but we emphasize the “Metrics, Control, Prompt” interpretation as it
relates to observability. In our telemetry-aware context, an MCP server is essentially an observability and
control hub. It exposes APIs to log and query metrics/traces, to manage and version prompts, and to send
control commands (for instance, instructing an agent to switch tools or trigger a reset) in a unified manner.
The next section will illustrate how this MCP-based design underpins new development workflows.
5
Edit Prompt
(CLI/Notebook)
Run Models
& Collect Logs
Inspect Logs
& Metrics
Tweak Prompt
& Repeat
1 2 3
4
Edit Prompt
(In-IDE)
Run in IDE
+ Auto-Telemetry
AI-Suggested
Prompt Tweak
1 2
3
Traditional Human Development Loop
Telemetry-Enhanced IDE Development Loop
User
Figure 2: Comparison between traditional prompt-engineering workflow (top) and MCP-enhanced IDE
development loop (bottom). The traditional approach requires manual context switching between tools, while
the telemetry-aware IDE integrates all steps within a unified environment, providing real-time feedback and
AI-assisted prompt optimization.
3 Telemetry-Aware Design Patterns in AI Development
In this section, we outline three progressive design patterns for AI application development, each incorporating
telemetry and feedback at increasing levels of automation. While various generative AI design patterns
have been proposed (Koc, 2024), the feedback loop and direct interaction mechanisms for developers within
many of these emerging LLM patterns remain an area requiring further clarification and development. These
patterns are (1) Local metrics-in-the-loop coding, (2) CI-integrated prompt optimization, and (3) Autonomous
monitoring agents. They correspond to stages in the development and deployment lifecycle, but the underlying
principles are similar: use observability data to drive improvements in prompts or agent policies. We describe
each pattern and provide examples of how an MCP-enabled IDE could facilitate the workflow.
3.1 1. Local Development with Metrics in the Loop
The first pattern involves the individual developer working within an IDE that provides real-time feedback
about the AI’s behavior. In a standard IDE, a developer writing code might rely on debug logs or a watch
window to inspect program state after running the code. By analogy, in a telemetry-aware IDE, whenever
the developer runs an AI-powered function (e.g., executes a prompt or tests an agent in a sandbox), the
environment immediately surfaces telemetry insights: summary metrics and trace excerpts from that run.
Concretely, consider a developer iterating on a prompt for a question-answering agent. They write an initial
prompt and execute it with some test query. A telemetry-aware IDE could automatically display information
such as: the number of tokens in the prompt vs. completion, the model’s response latency, and any evaluation
results (e.g., whether the answer matches a ground truth if available, or a rating from a critique model).
Moreover, the developer could inspect the trace of the agent’s reasoning if the agent uses a chain-of-thought
or tool use. For example, if the agent is supposed to call an API and then answer, the trace might show what
API call was made and the result, enabling the developer to verify that the agent followed the correct steps.
The MCP integration allows the developer to ask the IDE (or rather, the LLM assistant in the IDE) questions
about the telemetry: e.g. "From your trace logs, what are common sources of error?" or "Suggest prompt
improvements based on the last 10 interactions." (An illustrative example of the IDE displaying telemetry
insights and providing a prompt recommendation is shown in Figure 5 located in Appendix A). The IDE
6
forwards such queries to the MCP server, which has access to the stored traces and metrics of the project,
and the LLM then composes an answer by analyzing that data. In the illustrated case (see Appendix A),
the assistant identified that the conversation flow was slow (long response times) and users often provided
certain inputs, then recommended adding explicit instructions in the prompt to structure those inputs. This
kind of iterative loop – trial prompt → run → telemetry → revised prompt – can be done manually (with
the developer reading metrics and adjusting) or in a human-in-the-loop manner (with the LLM suggesting
adjustments based on telemetry and the developer accepting or tweaking them).
The benefit of local metrics-in-the-loop development is rapid feedback. Prompt engineering traditionally
has a slow feedback cycle: one runs a prompt on a few examples and subjectively judges the outputs. With
integrated telemetry, the feedback becomes more objective and immediate, as the system can highlight
quantitative issues (e.g., "The last 5 outputs had an average hallucination score of 0.7, which is high") and
even point to specific trace examples that illustrate a problem. This accelerates the prompt refinement
process. It also engenders a mindset shift – prompts and agent behaviors are not "magic" or static; they
produce data that can be inspected and responded to. In essence, the developer is debugging prompts with
logs, much as they would debug code with print statements.
Enabling this pattern requires the IDE to have access to a backend that accumulates and indexes telemetry
for queries. The MCP client/server fulfills this role, acting as a repository of all prompts executed and their
outcomes. A developer can retrieve, for instance, "the most recent trace with a high hallucination score"
or "the output of the last conversation turn", via natural language queries that an MCP-enabled system
interprets (Comet, 2025a;b). The IDE plugin translates these queries (possibly using a special syntax or an
API call) to MCP requests. Under the hood, the server might store traces in a database and maintain metrics
like token counts and evaluation scores per trace. When queried, it can filter and aggregate this information.
The results are then fed back into the IDE’s LLM assistant to generate a human-readable summary or
recommendation. This seamless loop is what makes the observability-first IDE experience powerful: the
developer is essentially conversing with both the LLM and the data about the LLM’s past performance, all
within one interface.
3.2 2. Continuous Integration with Telemetry-Guided Optimization
The second pattern extends telemetry-aware practices into the CI/CD (Continuous Integration/Continuous
Deployment) pipeline. In modern software projects, CI is used to automatically run test suites, linters,
and other analysis on every code change, catching regressions early. We propose that AI-centric projects
incorporate prompt and agent evaluations in CI, enabled by the same telemetry infrastructure used in
development.
A concrete example is integrating a suite of prompt test cases: for instance, a set of input queries with
expected answer characteristics (not necessarily one correct answer, but perhaps certain constraints like
“should cite a source” or “should not contain profanity”). Whenever a developer updates a prompt or changes
the agent chain, the CI can run these test queries through the system (maybe using a fixed LLM checkpoint
for consistency) and log the outputs to the MCP server. The MCP server, in turn, evaluates the outputs
against the expectations using predefined evaluators or metrics (these could be simple regex checks, or more
advanced LLM-based evaluators for coherence, etc.). The resulting metrics (like “pass/fail” counts for each
test, or average scores) are then used to determine if the change introduced a regression. This is analogous
to unit tests for code – here we have unit tests for prompts/agents. If a significant drop in performance is
detected (say the average relevance score dropped by 10%), the CI can flag the build or even automatically
revert the prompt change. The use of time-series data accessible through basic language queries can empower
non-technical colleagues to define test cases and facilitate regression testing, for example, by monitoring for
drift beyond a certain percentage point.
Telemetry plays a central role in this pattern by providing a historical baseline and context for each run.
Because the server accumulates data over time, it can compare the current run’s metrics to previous runs. For
instance, it can answer: “Is the accuracy of the Q&A prompt in this commit within the expected range based
on the last 10 commits?” If not, something might be wrong. Moreover, storing traces from CI runs means
that when a failure occurs, developers can inspect the exact inputs and outputs that led to it, using the same
7
Dev Push
(Prompt / Code)
CI Job
(Test & Telemetry)
Telemetry Check
(MCP Query)
trigger log
Auto-Opt
(Optional)
PR w/ Suggestions
(Human Review) Approve?
if regress
patch
tests passed
yes, merge
no, refine
User
e.g. run only if metrics drop >10%
Figure 3: CI/CD pipeline with MCP telemetry, user trigger, and clear approval flow. A user initiates the
commit; telemetry checks drive optional optimization, and an approval decision routes to merge or further
refinement.
IDE tooling described in Pattern 1. This tightens the integration between development and testing: rather
than digging through log files on a CI server, a developer could simply query the MCP from their IDE (e.g.,
“Show me examples of where the new prompt failed the tests.”) to retrieve the offending traces for review.
Another aspect is automated prompt optimization in CI. Since CI can execute code, it can also execute
prompt optimization routines provided by frameworks like DSPy’s MIPRO or PromptWizard (Khattab et al.,
2023; Agarwal et al., 2024), as long as they expose an API or script. Imagine a scenario where a developer
provides an initial version of a complex prompt, perhaps by roughly writing out sections and examples.
Instead of expecting the developer to manually fine-tune it, the CI could trigger an optimization job that
uses, say, DSPy’s MIPRO algorithm or PromptWizard’s self-refinement. This job would use the MCP data
(or a static training set) as a basis to evaluate candidate prompts. The optimization might run for a few
minutes and then output a refined prompt suggestion. The CI could then either automatically replace the
prompt (which is risky and perhaps better for an offline process) or open a merge request for the developer
to review the optimized prompt. Essentially, the continuous part of CI would include continuously searching
for better prompts whenever changes occur.
There are early signs of this approach. For example, DSPy’s philosophy is to integrate prompt tuning into
the development pipeline programmatically. One could incorporate a DSPy “program” in the repository that
defines the prompt and an optimization objective; the CI then runs that program to update the prompt.
Microsoft’s PromptWizard, while presented as an interactive research tool, could be adapted to run headless
in CI to improve a prompt overnight. The key enabler is having a reliable evaluation metric or suite, which
the telemetry system provides. If the project has accumulated real usage traces and labeled outcomes, those
can serve as a testbed for optimization in CI (which is superior to generic benchmarks because it reflects the
actual use case).
In summary, telemetry-aware CI means treating prompt/agent quality as a continuously tested property of
the system. The MCP protocol provides the glue: it ensures that both the IDE and CI jobs speak the same
language to log and retrieve prompt executions and their evaluations. A prompt tested in CI with certain
metrics will have those metrics stored via MCP, and the developer can later query or visualize them in the
IDE. Conversely, issues discovered during local development (and their fixes) can be codified as CI tests to
8
prevent regressions. This synergy leads to a more robust development lifecycle, where improvements and bug
fixes in prompts are tracked and validated just like code changes.
3.3 3. Autonomous Monitoring and Self-Improvement Agents
The third pattern is forward-looking: it envisions deployed AI systems that include autonomous agents
monitoring other agents. Once an application is running in production (e.g., a deployed chatbot or an
agent-based workflow serving users), telemetry can be used not only by human developers but also by
automated “watchers” that ensure the system behaves optimally. We refer to these as autonomous monitor
agents.
Consider a complex multi-agent system, for instance, a customer support bot that has multiple sub-agents
for different tasks. This system produces a continuous stream of interactions and outcomes. An autonomous
monitor agent could be implemented (possibly as an LLM itself or a traditional program) which subscribes to
this stream via the MCP interface. This agent might periodically query the MCP server for recent traces
with certain characteristics, for example: “find conversations in the last hour where the user was unhappy
(negative feedback) or the agent’s answer had a low confidence score.” Given those problematic traces, the
monitor agent could attempt to diagnose the issue. If it’s implemented as an LLM prompt, it might take
those traces and analyze them: “What went wrong in these interactions? Is there a pattern?” Suppose it
finds that many failures involve a particular tool the agent is using incorrectly. The monitor could then
formulate a suggested fix, perhaps “When using the database lookup tool, ensure to check for null results,”
which could translate to a prompt adjustment or a minor code modification in the agent’s logic.
A more concrete example involves OpenAI’s function-calling API, which allows tools to be invoked by the
model. Imagine an agent that uses function calls to retrieve data. A monitor agent could watch function call
traces via MCP and notice if a certain function call often returns errors. It could then autonomously create a
pull request or a patch to the agent’s prompt, adding an instruction like “If the database query fails, try
an alternative query or apologize to the user."“ This patch would go through the normal CI process which,
thanks to telemetry integration, can evaluate if the patch helps. In a sense, the monitor agent is acting as a
specialized developer that continuously fine-tunes the system using evidence from telemetry. This also means
additional logging and testing may not be required within a given AI application, as existing LLM-specific
telemetry solutions can be leveraged.
While fully autonomous self-improving systems are still experimental, components of this vision are taking
shape. Microsoft’s PromptWizard already demonstrates an LLM refining prompts based on feedback in a
loop, which can be seen as a micro-scale “self-healing” mechanism for a prompt. There are also research
efforts on meta-prompts where one LLM monitors another’s outputs for correctness or safety, often called
an “evaluator” or “judge” model. Our paradigm can incorporate such evaluator models as first-class agents
connected via MCP. For example, a hallucination watchdog LLM could be subscribed to each new answer
produced by the main model. If it detects a likely hallucination (perhaps by cross-checking facts), it could
trigger an intervention, such as logging an alert via MCP or even instructing the main model to provide
sources.
The architectural advantage of MCP here is unification and access control. A monitor agent needs a lot of
data to be effective – potentially a feed of all interactions. MCP can provide a filtered stream (via an API or
event subscription) of telemetry data to authorized monitor agents. Because MCP manages prompts and
context, these monitor agents could also use it to update prompts or settings. This is the Control aspect of
MCP: beyond passive observation, the protocol could allow certain clients to make changes (e.g., deploy a
new prompt version or adjust a parameter) in a controlled manner. In practice, such control actions would
be gated by policies or human review for safety. However, even without full autonomy, a monitor agent could
at least propose changes. It might open a ticket or notify a developer with a suggested improvement and
relevant evidence from logs.
Autonomous monitoring agents lead the ultimate goal of telemetry-aware design: a system that not only
observes itself but improves itself over time (in an evolutionary manner). Achieving this in production reliably
will require advances in ensuring the quality of the agent’s suggestions (so that it doesn’t introduce new
problems) and in governance (to avoid a scenario where an autonomous agent makes inappropriate changes).
9
That said, having the MCP infrastructure in place greatly simplifies prototyping such agents, because they
can be developed and tested in the same way any client uses the MCP API. One could develop a monitor
agent offline, feed it past telemetry data from MCP (e.g., logs from last week) to see if it correctly identifies
issues, and then gradually deploy it to live monitoring. This incremental path is similar to how one might
deploy a new microservice – starting in shadow mode, then giving it more responsibilities. The key difference
is that the monitor agent’s domain is the AI’s own behavior.
4 Architecture: The MCP Server for Unified Telemetry and Control
Central to the above design patterns is the MCP server – the component that enables IDEs, CI pipelines, and
agents to all share a common view of prompts, metrics, and traces. We now describe the architecture and
capabilities of the MCP server in more detail, using the implementation provided by Comet’s Opik platform
and its open-source Opik MCP server (Comet, 2025a;c;d) as an illustrative example. The goal is to show how
the MCP server serves as the unifying backbone that links development (IDE), testing (CI), and runtime
monitoring in an AI-first application.
Unified Interface and Transport: The MCP server exposes a consistent API for clients to perform operations
such as logging a trace, querying stored traces, saving or retrieving prompt templates, listing projects or
experiments, and fetching aggregate metrics through cookbook-style docs and examples that the IDE can
use as examples to enable logging, metrics, and telemetry. Importantly, it is designed to be accessible from
different environments. For instance, Opik’s MCP server supports multiple transport mechanisms so it can
integrate with various IDEs (Cursor, VS Code plugins, etc.) and also with non-UI clients (Comet, 2025a;b).
In an IDE like Cursor, a developer can add the MCP server as a connection (specifying an API key and
endpoint). Thereafter, the IDE’s AI assistant can use this channel to communicate with the server for any
telemetry-related query. The choice of standard protocols means the integration is relatively lightweight and
doesn’t require deep changes in the IDE, a key engineering decision to allow quick adoption.
Prompt Management: One core function of MCP is managing prompt versions and libraries. The server can
store prompts (e.g., system prompts or few-shot example sets) keyed by names or IDs. Through the MCP API,
a user or agent can list available prompts, fetch the latest version of a prompt, or save a new version (Comet,
2025b). This is extremely useful for keeping track of prompt iterations. For example, when a developer
accepts an optimized prompt recommendation (as in Figure 5), the IDE could save that new prompt to the
MCP server with a version tag or comment. Now the CI pipeline and other team members have access to it.
Conversely, if the CI’s automated optimizer finds a better prompt, it could update the repository and also call
the MCP API to record this prompt. Storing prompts centrally also enables prompt reuse and templating
across projects – teams can build a library of tested prompts for common tasks (summarization, Q&A, etc.),
queryable via MCP. This concept, enabling the creation of libraries of tested and reusable prompts, is also
related to ideas like "Prompt Baking" (Bhargava et al., 2024).
Trace Logging and Analysis: The MCP server logs traces for each interaction or sequence of interactions as
directed by the application. A trace typically includes the prompt used (or chain of prompts in an agent), the
model’s output, any tool calls and their results (for agent scenarios), and metadata like timestamps, model
identity, and evaluation scores. Opik’s implementation provides methods to log various types of traces such
as basic LLM calls, multi-step agent traces, conversation logs, and even distributed traces that tie together
multi-component processes (Comet, 2025a). This flexibility suggests that MCP is meant to capture not only
single-turn prompt-response pairs but also complex graphs of events. For analysis, the MCP server can be
queried with filters (e.g., by time range, by specific prompt or scenario, or by an evaluation metric threshold).
As described earlier, the server can answer questions like "How many traces have been logged to the ’demo’
project?" or "What is the latest trace’s output?" directly (Comet, 2025b). These queries abstract away the
underlying database queries. The user (or LLM agent) can simply ask in natural language via the IDE, and
the MCP handles retrieving the info to feed into the LLM’s answer. Additionally, the server can perform
simple analyses like counting occurrences of events or computing average token usage, which can then be
presented as part of telemetry summaries.
It’s worth noting that because MCP can store evaluation results alongside traces, the queries can combine
them. For example, "search for the most recent traces with high hallucination scores in project X" (Comet,
10
AI
Application
Metrics & Telemetry
Store (Opik)
MCP Server
(Opik MCP)
MCP Client
(AI-Assisted IDE)
1. trace
2. getMetrics()
3. query
4. metrics / traces
5. metrics / traces
6. LLM Decision:
Refine Prompt
Tool-call
execution
Figure 4: Telemetry round-trip message sequence. (1) Application streams a trace to Metrics & Telemetry
Store (Opik). (2) The IDE/LLM requests metrics via the MCP client, which queries Opik Store (3). (4)-(5)
Metrics/traces flow back to the IDE/LLM, where (6) a local LLM tool-call can refine prompts based on the
received telemetry.
2025b) is a query that relies on an evaluation metric (hallucination score) being logged for each trace. The
MCP server thus functions as a search engine over both raw interaction data and derived metrics. This
capability exemplifies why unifying these concerns (Metrics, Prompt, and Control) is powerful: one can
correlate prompt versions with metrics easily, or find problematic outputs and directly retrieve the prompts
that led to them.
Metrics and Project Dashboard: In addition to individual traces, the MCP server maintains aggregate project
metrics. A project in this context might correspond to an application or an experiment (e.g., "Banking
Customer Support Chatbot v1"). Metrics could include things like average response time, success rate of
queries, and token consumption over time. These can be fetched via the API for building dashboards or
triggering alerts. Opik’s MCP server documentation mentions "fetching project metrics" as part of the
interface (Comet, 2025b). One could imagine a CI pipeline querying these metrics after a load test to decide
if the latest deployment meets performance targets. Likewise, a monitor agent might ask for a trend (e.g.,
"has the satisfaction score improved this week?"), which the MCP might answer by providing stats if such a
metric is tracked. By centralizing metrics, MCP avoids the duplication of instrumentation code; every client,
be it the IDE, CI, or an external monitoring service, taps into the same store.
Control and Tooling Integration: The "Control" aspect of the MCP telemetry pattern is perhaps the most
forward-looking. In the current implementation, control is implicit in the sense that one can save prompts or
initiate evaluations via the MCP API, actions that cause changes. However, one can envision more explicit
control messages. For instance, a command could be sent to switch the active prompt for an agent to a
different version for A/B testing prompts. Or a control signal could pause an agent if a certain metric
threshold is exceeded, like halting an agent that has gone into an infinite loop, based on trace analysis. While
these are not detailed in the documentation we have, the architecture allows insertion of such commands
since the MCP server sits between the IDE (or other clients) and the model execution environment.
A practical example of control could be the Agent Development Kit (ADK) integration mentioned earlier.
Through MCP integrating with a given agentic framework, developers are allowed to start/stop agents and
get full trace visibility from the IDE (Comet, 2025a;b). This implies a control channel where the IDE can send
an instruction like "launch agent with config X and feed outputs to server." Similarly, LLMs with function
calling, such as OpenAI’s, can be monitored and perhaps controlled (e.g., disabling a function/tool if it leads
to errors) via such a protocol.
11
From a systems perspective, the MCP server can be seen as middleware in the LLM AI toolchain. It doesn’t
replace the LLM or the application’s code; instead, it instruments and mediates. By doing so, it decouples
optimization and analysis from the core application logic. This decoupling is essential for plugging in external
optimizers or validators. For example, one could run a separate process that periodically queries MCP
for recent performance metrics and, if certain conditions are met, calls an optimizer library (like a DSPy
MIPRO optimizer) to generate a better prompt, which it then submits back to MCP and possibly to a
repository. The application using the prompt might then be notified or can pull the updated prompt at its
next startup. Because MCP provides a version-controlled prompt store, rolling back is also straightforward if
an optimization misfires, as one can revert to an earlier prompt version.
Security and permissions are also an architectural consideration (though beyond our scope to detail): since
MCP centralizes access to potentially sensitive data (model inputs/outputs, user queries, etc.), it needs access
control. The MCP design discussed by Hou et al. (2025) suggests phases like creation and update include
considerations of privacy and security. In practice, API keys, role-based permissions (who can query vs. who
can modify prompts) would be part of a robust MCP server deployment. For an open-source tool like Opik’s
server, developers can self-host it and thus control their data, or use a cloud service with guarantees.
In summary, the MCP server architecture provides:
• A single source of truth for prompts and telemetry data.
• Standardized queries for analysis and debugging.
• Interoperability between different stages of development (IDE, CI, production monitoring).
• Extensibility for future integration of optimizers and automated agents.
By emphasizing architecture over any single algorithm, we allow the ecosystem to evolve. Today’s state-ofthe-art optimizers (e.g., MIPROv2 in DSPy (Khattab et al., 2023) or PromptWizard (Agarwal et al., 2024))
can be tomorrow’s legacy, as new ones will emerge. But with an MCP-based design, the AI development
workflow does not need to be reinvented for each new optimizer. The optimizers can simply hook into the
same telemetry streams and update the same prompt repositor
<truncated 16530 bytes>

NOTE: The output was truncated because it was too long. Use a more targeted query or a smaller range to get the information you need.

### ASSISTANT (Session 621629b6)
Here is the key synthesis of the useful patterns, architectural designs, and implications from the paper: **"Mind the Metrics: Patterns for Telemetry-Aware In-IDE AI Application Development using Model Context Protocol (MCP)"** (arXiv:2506.11019v1). 

The full fetched paper is saved locally at [content.md](file:///Users/ewansair/.gemini/antigravity/brain/621629b6-569d-4248-ac9f-f44c1c03cbb6/.system_generated/steps/16/content.md).

---

### 1. Core Vision: Agent-Integrated Development Environment (AIDE)
Traditional IDEs assist in code generation, but treat LLM components as opaque. The paper proposes **AIDE**, a concept that integrates real-time telemetry (latency, token usage, cost, hallucination rates, facts/toxicity scores) into the active IDE development loop via the **Model Context Protocol (MCP)**. 

### 2. Three Design Patterns
The paper outlines a progression of telemetry-aware development patterns:

*   **Pattern 1: Local Development with Metrics-in-the-Loop**
    *   **Mechanism:** When running an agent or prompt in a sandbox, metrics and execution traces (such as tool-calling graphs) are surfaced instantly in the IDE's UI.
    *   **Developer Interaction:** Developers can query logs in natural language (e.g., *"Suggest prompt improvements based on the last 10 interactions"*). The IDE's assistant queries the MCP telemetry store and generates recommendations.
*   **Pattern 2: CI-Integrated Prompt Optimization**
    *   **Mechanism:** Running prompt unit-test suites on code/prompt changes (e.g., testing against safety, brevity, or factual constraints). If average evaluation scores regress (e.g., >10%), builds are flagged or reverted.
    *   **Automation:** Integrates automated optimization frameworks like **DSPy (MIPRO)** or **PromptWizard** directly into CI pipelines to rewrite/tune prompts programmatically.
*   **Pattern 3: Autonomous Monitoring and Self-Improvement Agents**
    *   **Mechanism:** Production telemetry is consumed by background "watchdog" or evaluator agents. 
    *   **Self-Healing:** If an evaluator notices specific errors (e.g., negative feedback, tool-use failures), it diagnoses the cause, generates prompt fixes, and automatically creates a Pull Request for human approval.

### 3. MCP as Middleware (Metrics, Prompt, Control)
Instead of forcing teams to tie themselves to a single optimizer or observability tool, the paper positions **MCP** as the standard broker decoupling three layers:
1.  **Metrics:** Unifies raw logs, execution traces (graph-based multi-agent DAGs), and evaluation results.
2.  **Prompt:** Serves as a version-controlled, centralized prompt template registry (aligned with *"Prompt Baking"* concept).
3.  **Control:** Allows tools or agents to send instructions (e.g., start/stop agents, switch prompt versions for A/B testing).

### 4. Implementation Reference
The architecture is demonstrated through Comet's open-source [opik-mcp](https://github.com/comet-ml/opik-mcp) server, which bridges the gap between active application traces (instrumented via Opik SDKs) and the IDE's MCP client.

---

### Summary of Work Done
1. **Retrieved & Analyzed:** Queried the paper metadata and downloaded the experimental HTML format of the preprint to [content.md](file:///Users/ewansair/.gemini/antigravity/brain/621629b6-569d-4248-ac9f-f44c1c03cbb6/.system_generated/steps/16/content.md) to inspect full sections.
2. **Updated Memory:** Wrote the end-of-session baton pass to [BATON.md](file:///Users/ewansair/portable-spine/agents/antigravity/BATON.md) to maintain task continuity.